Docs: Add database architecture docs (#19800)
grafana/grafana: contribute/architecture/state.md

# State

Grafana uses a database to persist settings between restarts. In fact, if you don't specify one, Grafana creates a [SQLite3](https://www.sqlite.org/) database file on your local disk. This guide explains how to store and retrieve data from the database.

> Grafana supports the following databases:

Reviewer: Maybe link to https://grafana.com/docs/installation/requirements/#database and/or add some additional information to the requirements documentation that can be linked to?

- [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [SQLite3](https://www.sqlite.org/)

Grafana uses the [XORM](https://xorm.io) framework for persisting objects to the database. For more information on how to use XORM, refer to the [documentation](http://gobook.io/read/github.com/go-xorm/manual-en-US/).

[Services](services.md) don't use XORM directly. Instead, services use the _SQL store_, a special type of service that provides an abstraction for the database layer. There are two ways of using the `sqlstore`: using `sqlstore` handlers, and using the `SqlStore` instance.

## `sqlstore` handlers

> > **Deprecated:** We are deprecating `sqlstore` handlers in favor of using the `SqlStore`  object directly in each service. Since most services still use the `sqlstore` handlers, we still want to explain how they work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Deprecated:** We are deprecating `sqlstore` handlers in favor of using the `SqlStore` object directly in each service. Since most services still use the `sqlstore` handlers, we still want to explain how they work.
```

Reviewer 2: This is an extra space between `SqlStore` and object but GitHub is being dumb.

The `sqlstore` package allows you to register command handlers that either store, or retrieve objects from the database. `sqlstore` handlers are similar to services:

> - Services are command handlers that _contain business logic_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Services](services.md) are command handlers that _contain business logic_.
```

> - `sqlstore` handlers are command handlers that _access the database_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `sqlstore` handlers are [command handlers](services.md#handle-commands) that _access the database_.
```

> More importantly, command handlers for services are _methods_, while `sqlstore` handlers are _functions_ that access global variables.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is a bit unclear to me. What is the difference between a method and a function? Are stating that functions belong to a struct are methods as opposed to package-wide functions?

Sorry if this a dumb question but I don't really understand what we're trying to convey with this.

Author: Go is interesting because it allows you to have both functions and methods, whereas many OOP languages only supports methods. C only supports functions for example. In short:

Method:
```
func (s *MyStruct) MyMethod(s string) error {
}
```

Function:
```
func MyMethod(s *MyStruct, s string) error {
}
```

I personally use functions primarily, and reserve methods for _behavior_ related to the struct.

For a `Server` object, I'd say that `Start` and `Stop` could be considered behavior of a Server, but something like `parseConfigurationFile` is not, as should be a function instead.

Reviewer 2: Apologies as I could have been clearer with the intention of my question. It was oriented towards the intention of the sentence.

Why is it important that we understand this distinction (as it reads "more importantly")? Certainly, it seems like an implementation detail and something that the compiler would be able to tell me when I try to misuse the library.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for dragging this conversation - when something reads "more importantly" my brain immediately triggers into panic mode. I get a sense of urgency that this is a detail that I must absolutely get right, and store it in my head otherwise what I'm building won't work.

From my understanding, it is not the case (and I can certainly be wrong).

Author: Oh! I'd be up for changing it. Maybe "Also", or "Additionally"?

Reviewer 2: That would work.

I'd err on the side of removing it altogether as I don't feel it adds anything that hasn't been explained before.

### Register a `sqlstore` handler

> **Deprecated:** Refer to the [deprecation note for `sqlstore` handlers](#sqlstore-handlers).

To register a handler:

- Create a new file `myrepo.go` in the `sqlstore` package.
- Create a [command handler](services.md#handle-commands).
- Register the handler in the `init` function:

```go
func init() {

>     bus.AddHandler("sql", SaveDashboard)

Reviewer 3: `SaveDashboard` here, but `DeleteDashboard` in the example.

I want to say that we should add a disclaimer about usage of this feature. We don't want users to create and delete over existing tables in their new services as that would make Grafana very hard to maintain. But this doc is perhaps not the right place for that.

Author: ```suggestion
    bus.AddHandler("sql", DeleteDashboard)
```

Good catch!

        return err
    })
}
```

Here, `inTransaction` is a helper function in the `sqlstore` package that provides a session, that lets you execute SQL statements.

## `SqlStore`

As opposed to a `sqlstore` handler, the `SqlStore` is a service itself. The `SqlStore` has the same responsibility however: to store and retrieve objects, to and from the database.

To use the `SqlStore`, inject the `SQLStore` in your service struct:

```go
type MyService struct {
    SQLStore *sqlstore.SqlStore `inject:""`
}
```

You can now make SQL queries in any of your [command handlers](services.md#handle-commands) or [event listeners](services.md#subscribe-to-events):

```go
func (s *MyService) DeleteDashboard(cmd *models.DeleteDashboardCommand) error {
    if err := s.SQLStore.WithDbSession(ctx, func(sess *sqlstore.DBSession) error {
        _, err := sess.Exec("DELETE FROM dashboards WHERE dashboard_id=?", cmd.DashboardID)
        return err
    })
}
```

For transactions, use the `WithTransactionalDbSession` method instead.

## Migrations

As Grafana evolves, it becomes necessary to create _schema migrations_ for one or more database tables.

> To see all the types of migrations you can add, refer to [migrations.go](/pkg/services/sqlstore/migrator/migrations.go).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examples of migrations you can add, refer to [migrations.go](/pkg/services/sqlstore/migrator/migrations.go).
```

Reviewer 2: Might be wrong as I did not double-check but I would be surprised if we cover every possible case.

Author: Are we encouraging people to write their own migration types (as opposed to migrations)?

These seem to be the available ones:

- AddColumnMigration
- AddIndexMigration
- DropIndexMigration
- AddTableMigration
- DropTableMigration
- RenameTableMigration
- CopyTableDataMigration
- TableCharsetMigration

I wanted to say that you can choose from any of these.

Reviewer 2: Great, that makes sense. Also, seems like we `RawSqlMigration` which would effectively cover _every_ possible case. 

I'm fine with the current wording.

Before you add a migration, make sure that you:

- Never change a migration that has been committed and pushed to master.
- Always add new migrations, to change or undo previous migrations.

Add a migration using one of the following methods:

- Add migrations in the `migrations` package.
- Implement the `DatabaseMigrator` for the service.

**Important:** If there are previous migrations for a service, use that method. By adding migrations using both methods, you risk running migrations in the wrong order.

### Add migrations in `migrations` package

Most services have their migrations located in the [migrations](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/pkg/services/sqlstore/migrations/migrations.go) package.

To add a migration:

- Open the [migrations.go](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/pkg/services/sqlstore/migrations/migrations.go) file.
- In the `AddMigrations` function, find the `addXxxMigration` function for the service you want to create a migration for.
- At the end of the `addXxxMigration` function, register your migration:

> ```go

Reviewer: Code examples tends to become out of date quite easily. Maybe consider linking to a permalink of code or maybe markdown files don't support rendering it same way as GitHub comments does it? For example https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/00d0640b6e778ddaca021670fe851fe00982acf2/pkg/services/sqlstore/migrations/migrations.go#L55-L70

> func addMyServiceMigration(mb *migrator.Service) {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func addMyServiceMigration(mg *migrator.Service) {
```

# State

Grafana persists state in a SQLite, MySQL, or PostgreSQL database. 

Grafana uses the [XORM](https://xorm.io) framework for persisting objects to the database. For more information, refer to the [XORM documentation](http://gobook.io/read/github.com/go-xorm/manual-en-US/).

There are two ways of persisting state in Grafana: using `sqlstore` handlers, and using the `SqlStore` instance.

## `sqlstore` handlers

> **Deprecated:** We are deprecating `sqlstore` handlers in favor of using the `SqlStore`  object directly in each service. Since most services still use the `sqlstore` handlers, we still want to explain how they work.

> In short, `sqlstore` handlers are [command handlers](services.md#handle-commands) that persist state to a database. 

Reviewer: There's query handlers as well.

Author: A query is really a command where you update one or more field on the command being handled. Do we need to treat them as two distinct things here?

In contrast, [services](services.md) are command handlers that contain business logic.

### Register a handler

> To register a handler:

Reviewer: Guess this should be market as deprecated as well since you mention that above.

- Create a new file `myrepo.go` in the `sqlstore` package.
- Create a [command handler](services.md#handle-commands).
- Register the handler in the `init` function.

```go
func init() {
    bus.AddHandler("sql", SaveDashboard)
}

func DeleteDashboard(cmd *models.DeleteDashboardCommand) error {
    return inTransaction(func(sess *DBSession) error {
        _, err := sess.Exec("DELETE FROM dashboards WHERE dashboard_id=?", cmd.DashboardID)
        return err
    })
}
```

`inTransaction` is a helper function that provides a session that lets you execute SQL statements.

## `SqlStore`

> The SqlStore is a [service](services.md) for persisting objects to the database.

Reviewer: ... and retrieving objects to/from the database?
